Hello to whoever is reading this!  This document is meant to explain the purpose of my code as well as the inspiration.

Inspiration:
During the 2024-2025 academic year, I was the team manager for the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee baseball program.  While there I managed and operated their Rapsodo.  
At the end of the winter practices and the start of the season I had all of this pitcher data that I had no clue what to do with.  At this point in time we were going through a tough portion of our schedule playing
a variety of talented baseball programs including some SEC schools.  Although we scuffled in the early parts of the season, some of our pitchers were proving effective even against top level competition.  This got me
thinking about why these particular pitchers were effective while others weren't.  There were other pitchers on our team who threw just as hard or had better movement on their pitches, so why these pitchers?  
This was the inspiration for this project.

Explantion:
The data that is used from this project was collected entirely from my time at UWM using their Rapsodo data, I worked tirelessly to try to make this data as accuarate as possible as Rapsodo's pitch inference system
is nowhere near perfect. Please keep in mind as you are running the program that there are data points that are incorrect, however I have taken steps to try to limit this.  Most of the code for this project has more
to do with the display of the data and having it appear nicely in the frames than the actual calculation of data.  To keep this explanation brief, I am not going to explain how all of the windows and buttons work, 
it essentially boils down to trial and error until you get the look you want.  Now onto how the pitcher data is processed.  The program first reads all of the CSVs for all of the pitchers on the team, I cleaned this 
data up a bit before downloading it to help with inaccuracy.  From there it groups the pitches into different buckets based on what the pitcher throws while also tracking the average velocity, average movement profile,
and pitch count of each individual pitch.  After this is done, any pitch that was not thrown more than 30 times will be thrown out, this is to remove any misreads that may have happened throughout the season.  
Then the horizontal and vertical break create the x and y cordinates on the graph displayed in the program.  These cordinates are then fed into a shoelace alogrithm that calculates the area of the shape formed by
each of the pitcher's pitches (NOTE: This assumes the pitcher has more than 2 pitches).  The area of the shape is then multiplied with the difference in velocity of their fastest average pitch and their slowest average
pitch to create what is called in the program "Scaled Area".  

Scaled Area is just one of many ideas I had to evaluate pitchers, and by no means is it perfect.  I will go into specific examples on the team later in this document,
but for now my initial comments on where this metric could be lacking is:

  1. Scaled area favors curveballs.  I noticed in general, the guys who threw curveballs tended to do better on this scale because curveballs get a lot of vertical 
space between fastballs as well as significant velocity drop off.  This almost automatically made pitcher's with decent curveballs place highly on scaled area. This
also neglects guys who rely on more east to west movement as the shape of their pitches is relatively flat making the area small.  This concept doesn't apply as much
for north and south pitchers as much because most pitchers get some natural horizontal movement to begin with.

  2. Scaled area favors quantity.  When I say quantity, I mean quantity of pitches.  When pitcher's have more pitches in their arsenal it expands the area of their collective pitch shapes.
So, relief pitchers who only throw two to three pitches will be undervalued by Scaled Area.  For example a pitcher with 5 bad pitches would probably have a higher Scaled Area than
a pitcher with 3 great pitches with all other things being equal.

  3.  Scaled area does not care about strikes.  It might be kind of obvious why this is the case, the calculation for scaled area has nothing to do with the result
of the pitch.  If I were to improve upon this project this is where I would start.  Although pitch shape and velocity matter, they only matter in the context of 
consistent strike throwing.  


Results:

Scaled Area did a pretty decent job at evaluating UWM's pitchers in retrospect.  At the top of the list you see some the team's best pitchers including conference 
pitcher of the year Gavin Theis.  Also among the top 7 in Scaled Area were pitchers Mike Sullivan, Aric Ehmke, and Logan Schulfer.  All three of these pitchers were 
weekend starters at some point in the year with Ehmke ending in the Saturday role, and Schulfer becoming an integral part of UWM's bullpen after a shaky start to 
the year.  Both Sullivan and Fishnick are sort of outliers in this sense because they are amongst the top 7 but yet neither of them performed well or showed any signs
of being capable of it.  There is no doubt Sullivan is the better pitcher, he throws a bit harder and his stuff is a bit better, but for general cases him and Fishnick
can be comparable.  Although their performance was mediocre, I can understand why Scaled Area rated them highly.  Like mentioned above they both threw slow curveballs
that certainly helps their Scaled Area.  Also in the top 7 are Riley Peterson and Tyler Andrews.  Peterson was our premier set up man who had an incredible season (in 
my personal opinion our set up man and closer is what made us a good team), and Andrews was a freshman who began to see appearances in leverage situations as the year
went on.  Below the top 7 you get into guys who did not make as big of a contribution.  A few key names that I think Scaled Area undervalued were Matthew Mueller and 
Tyler Deleskiewicz.  Its funny because out of everyone on the team they are probably the two most likely to get drafted.  They are 
both big and tall with room to put on a lot of muscle.  Why they get undervalued by Scaled Area is because they don't throw many pitches.
As stated above, pitchers who throw more pitches will have an advantage over pitchers who throw less, Mueller and Deleskiewicz
only throw three pitches thus they are devalued.  There is one last pitcher of note below the top 7.  Its the "Mr. Irrelevant" of my
rankings, the Horizon League conference reliever of the year, Logan Snow.  Logan is the biggest outlier on this list because other than
Theis, he was the best pitcher on UWM.  If you look a bit closer at Snow it makes sense his low Scaled Area.  He falls victim to all three
of Scaled Areas problems.  For starters, Snow is a east to west pitcher who does not throw a curveball.  His greatest strength is his ability to command the zone 
which also does not appear in Scaled Area.  Overall, Snow is the anti Scaled Area pitcher he goes against everything the calculation trys to show.  

Discussion:

Although Snow being a massive outlier was somewhat of a dissapointment, I decided to look at it a different way.  I think Scaled Area did a good job of generally predicting
pitchers' success and I think Snow's result made me realize that its not just about the top of the scale.  If you look at the leaderboard again, notice Snow's Scaled Area
is at least 100 points below the next closest.  This made me realize Snow falls in a unique subset of pitchers.  Pitcher's could fall in Snow's range and genuinly be bad,
they could have poor velocity separation, or poor movement profiles.  This leaves this really low Scaled Area score to be an interesting spot that still demands attention. 
At ameteur levels most of the players in this category may just not be very good, but among the misfits you'll find someone like Snow who throws so strange that it works.
And at higher levels the lower Scaled Area may be more indicative for interesting arms since there won't be as much weeding out.  

This may just be a coincidence, but I also noticed that the ranking of Scaled Area, although not perfect, had a similar organiztion as our actual pitching staff.  
The guys at the top were generally starters, and as you went down the list you slowly got into the leverage relievers and then into the innings eaters at the bottom (with the 
exception of Snow).  I have no clue if this could be a way to get a general outline of what guys should be what on your team, but as I refine it in the future I
may look into that.

Finally some improvements that I will do to Scaled Area when I come back to it is factor in strike percentage.  I don't know whether I would do it for individual pitches
or just as a whole, but I think throwing strikes does have to do with pitcher's success.  A great example is Logan Dobberstein, he has great raw pitchs but he struggles to command
the zone, so he saw limited opportunities.  Overall, I think that this would help weed out some more of the guys who just throw good stuff and don't have actually pitch well.
I think this may also encourage the ranking to shape like the pitching staff structure as well just because guys who throw harder and throw less pitches and strike tend
to throw in the later innings.



